feat: :sparkles: storage and backup section (#86)
onlimit-study/dmp: documents/data-management-plan/storage.qmd

# Storage, Backup, Recovery, and Access

As part of a DMP consideration should be given to the physical storage
and security of the data that a research project generates. There are of
course different levels of value that can be prescribed to data, some

> data is easy to replicate (for example data downloaded from public

Reviewer: I'm not sure what replicate means in this sentence. It's also tricky to use that word, since in research it means something very different than what I think you mean in this sentence (but I'm not sure).

repositories), and some that are impossible to replicate (like audio
files from an interview). By looking at how data is physically stored,
it is possible to guard against loss of data, like accidental deletion
by a human or a catastrophic failure of an entire system (like the loss
of a laptop or damage to a server space either by fire or water).

> ## Storage of the ON LiMiT research data and metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Storage of data and metadata
```

Since this repo and doc is about ON-LiMiT, we don't need to duplicate that information here.

> There are three main places for storage of data for the ON LiMiT
> project. The first two, where the data is generated are REDCap and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three main places we will store data from ON-LiMiT.
The first two, where the data is generated are [REDCap](https://project-redcap.org) and the
```

LIVA application. These are not final storage areas, but they will hold
data for long enough that we will need to take them into consideration.
The final storage place for data will be GenomeDK, which also is the
place where we are most responsible for setting up not only the storage,
but also the subsequent safety and security of the data.

> Once we know more about the specific data points we will be able to
> expand this section to look in more detail at whether or not the nature
> of the data (mainly sensitivity) will have any impact on the choice of
> storage method. We don't expect there to be any major changes, but we
> may want to employ more encryption to some data while at rest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: content-hidden
TODO: Once we know more about the specific data points we will be able to
expand this section to look in more detail at whether or not the nature
of the data (mainly sensitivity) will have any impact on the choice of
storage method. We don't expect there to be any major changes, but we
may want to employ more encryption to some data while at rest.
:::
```

This is more a comment to us right? It isn't necessary to include in a published DMP?

### GenomeDK (GDK)

GDK provides several storage areas. We will use the project storage in

> their Open zone for the ON LiMiT project. These locations are designed

Reviewer: Provide links to GDK's doc about "open zone", or describe it here.

on GDK, from where we will transform and load them into storage.

## Backup and Recovery

When looking at backup and recovery we again have two situations. With
the LIVA system we will need to trust that what is stated in the
contract is also what LIVA is doing, and that backup and recovery is
possible without any significant loss of data. REDCap is also 'out of
our hands' so to speak, as the setup is done entirely without any user
engagement.

Where we will play a role is with GenomeDK, as described below it is the
responsibility of the user to set up the files for backup, although it
is not possible for us to check that a recovery is possible, as backup
is still done by the GDK team.

### GenomeDK

GDK runs its own disk‑based backup at a remote site. By default nothing
is backed up. There is guidance given on the GDK
[website](https://genome.au.dk/docs/working-with-data/#backup) which
details how the backup should be set up. It is the responsibility of the
individual study teams to set this up correctly, but help can be
requested from the GDK team (in particular to check that the folders
have been set up correctly).

> Backups are initiated once per week and retained for 14 days and it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Backups are conducted once per week and retained for 14 days and it is
```

> possible to review recent backup runs, it is recommended that larger

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible to review recent backup runs. Though, it is recommended that larger
```

files are kept out of the backup structure and only added in compressed
format. At present we don't believe that we will have any files that
require this, but it will be something that we will keep under
observation (see section on data volume).

> What we back up: Raw data that cannot be reproduced, cleaned data in
> parquet format, and metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What we back up the original raw data, the cleaned data in
Parquet format, and the metadata.
```

Same with "replicate", reproduced has a different meaning in research.

> Where we put things: We will put metadata in `data/metadata/` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will put metadata in `data/metadata/` and
```

Reviewer: Not sure I understand here. What do you mean `data/metadata/`? The data will be put into a Data Package format via Sprout, which has it's own structure.

> project documentation in `docs/`, and we will mark the appropriate

Reviewer: Not sure `docs/` is necessary here, since that can be kept outside of GDK.

parent directory with `BACKUP` so it is captured by GDK’s weekly backup.
As we do not expect to do any analysis in the main study folder (see

> section on Sharing Data) we don't expect to be backing up any analysis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
section on [sharing](sharing.qmd) Data) we don't expect to be backing up any analysis
```

I know it doesn't exist yet, but good to put it in now.

scripts or results here. This will be done in separate project folders
which will be set up to only back up scripts and results.

### REDCap

There isn't any information on the website for REDCap at AU about backup
and recovery, but we have received the following reply from the team
maintaining the servers in answer to our questions about the procedures
in place.

> "AU-IT performs daily backups of the REDCap application and the data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> "AU-IT performs daily backups of the REDCap application and the data
```

Use block quotes for quoting people.

> contained within it. All backups are managed under TSM and stored in

Reviewer: What does TSM mean?

encrypted form. Ubuntu servers are configured to automatically install
security updates. A monthly vulnerability scan is carried out using

> Tenable. In accordance with Aarhus University's annual information

Reviewer: What is Tenable?

security cycle, a system and data classification is conducted at least
once a year, followed by a risk assessment. In addition to the regular
annual classification, a new risk assessment is carried out whenever
significant changes are made to the system."

> As some of the study is being conducted using the REDCap facilities at
> the University of Copenhagen, we will need to check that they are
> running a similar system.
> <!--TODO Check if REDCap CPH behaves in a similar fashion-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: content-hidden
TODO: As some of the study is being conducted using the REDCap facilities at
the University of Copenhagen, we will need to check that they are
running a similar system.

Check if REDCap CPH behaves in a similar fashion
:::
```

This doesn't read like it should be in the DMP, but to communicate internally right?

### LIVA

Backups, retention, recovery, and export options are governed by

> contract. The Liva contract draft should specify backup frequency,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our contract with them. The Liva contract draft should specify backup frequency,
```

encryption, location (EU/EEA), recovery time, and access/audit

> reporting. We will confirm these parameters during contract finalization
> and update this section once the contract is signed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reporting. 

::: content-hidden
TODO: Confirm these parameters during contract finalization
and update this section once the contract is signed.
:::
```

## Access to the main data structures

It should be a limited number of people who have access to the full set

> of research data. Ideally the project manager and the data architect. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of research data, which is currently the project manager and the [Seedcase Project](https://seedcase-project.org) team, which includes the data architect.
```

the real world some members of staff from Steno will have access to the
data held on REDCap as they will be doing most of the design and setup

> of instruments, and staff from the Seedcase project will have access to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of instruments will have access to
```

data on GDK as they will be helping with the transformation of raw data

> to parquet files, and the creation of metadata. It should be made clear

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to Parquet files, and the creation of metadata. It should be made clear
```
